---
layout: post
categories: red fruit
---

Parmenides of Elea was a radical philosopher. In the first explicit use of deductive argument among early Greeks, he reduces the world to something “ungenerated and imperishable, whole, unique, steadfast, and complete”. His conclusion is counterintuitive, given that diverse experiences seem to abound in life. Are these things illusory? Parmenides affirms that “alone, unmoving, is that for which as a whole the name is ‘to be’”: the names given to things by mortals are mistaken—mortals are mistaken. And yet, Parmenides dedicates half his poem to their opinions. Why? 
In this paper, I will examine the significance of the “route of mortals” in relation to Parmenides’s core philosophy. Questions I intend to explore include: From Parmenides’s perspective, in what ways are mortals mistaken? Why does Parmenides stoop to detailing their opinions? According to Parmenides, what are their opinions? And finally, should you, presumably a mortal, care about any of this? I will not propose one satisfying answer to these questions. Instead, I will root through the various relationships between mortal opinion (or doxa), Parmenides’s philosophy, and the philosophies of his contemporaries. I wish to convey what I find fascinating about his poem; that its linear, deductive structure masks a network of echoes and reverberations of meaning, which amalgamate finally into a unified thought that is really more of a feeling of Being. A “fullness.” (What better medium had Parmenides to represent fullness than a poem?)

Parmenides’s Version of Doxai
Before probing the relationship of doxai to Parmenides’s Route of Truth, I will summarize his account of The Route of Mortals. It is an impressive cosmology by early Greek standards. Mortals “distinguished things opposite in body,” namely “the aetherial fire of flame, mild, very light” and “dark night, a dense and heavy body.” The properties of things are due to the ratios of light and night in their makeup, but “all is full of light and obscure night together, of both equally,” meaning there is an overall balance of light and night in the kosmos. Included in the kosmos are sun and moon, earth, and stars, as well as celestial rings of fire through which these bodies travel around “the goddess who governs all things” Among what the goddess governs is the creation of gods; Love comes first. She also governs birth, of which Parmenides provides a short disquisition. The overarching doxa is that “things have grown and now are and afterwards after growing up will come to an end. And upon them humans have established a name to mark each one.”
As McKirahan discusses, Parmenides’s cosmology marks an improvement upon his rivals’. In particular, a dualist theory explains the existence of diverse/opposing properties with more ease than a monist theory. Even other dualist theories don’t work as well as Parmenides’s: Xenophanes’s “dualistic account that posited water and earth as basic substances was unlikely to explain many important features of the kosmos satisfactorily.” Water and earth are not clearly opposites, while light and night are. This intuitive appeal of Parmenides’s doxai, also felt through the simplicity of the image of the goddess directing everything, is essential, as he purports to describe the most natural interpretation of the senses when they are trusted.

Parmenides’s Spurning of Doxai
The Route of Mortals is presented by Parmenides as a mistake of judgement. The goddess ends her “reliable account;” from now on, we will “learn mortal opinions, listening to the deceitful order of [her] words.” As Panagiotis Thanassas discusses in Parmenides, Cosmos, and Being: A Philosophical Investigation, the word “deceitful” is “the stumbling block for every interpretation of Doxa,” as it seems incompatible with “the status of the goddess as the goddess of truth.” The Goddess is presented as a teacher, aiding Parmenides in learning “all things.” Teaching Parmenides the “opinions of mortals, in which there is no true reliance” is not at all the same as deceiving him. In addition, “the ordering that appears” can also be translated as “appropriate world-arrangement,” so there must be some merit to the doxa: it is the best possible account of the kosmos as inferred from the senses. (It is important to consider that our version of the Route of Mortals is the most fragmented and incomplete of any part of Parmenides’s poem. The Route of Mortals is believed to be the largest part of the poem, so it probably offered many other deep insights into human experience.) So, why is it deceitful? Thanassas concludes that there are two doxai at work here, the divine and the mortal, and the mortal one is deceitful. I think his interpretation is more complicated than Parmenides could have intended. The more obvious interpretation, that “deceitful” is used in a softer sense, seems to be endorsed by McKirahan. Instead of the goddess’s account tricking Parmenides in some way, it will simply reveal the mistakenness of mortal opinions, in effect protecting Parmenides from deceit.
In what ways are mortal opinions mistaken? The goddess claims that mortal opinion is flawed from the start. Mortals “established two forms to name in their judgments, of which it is not right to name one—in this they have gone astray.” The phrase “it is not right to name one” could have a couple meanings. It could be wrong to name any number of fundamental forms, implying that even to name one of them is wrong. It could also be wrong to name one of the specific forms mentioned by Parmenides (probably night, because it seems more likely to evoke “what-is-not”). The second interpretation is hardly in line with the rest of the poem, where neither of the forms is identified at all with “what-is-not.” The first interpretation shows promise, as any form of the type proposed in the Route of Mortals could not belong in a changeless world. At least, that is what McKirahan says. I personally do not see how light or night cannot belong in a changeless world, so I do not think Parmenides has successfully dismissed the Route of Mortals just yet.

The goddess also generally lampoons mortals, who are “two-headed” and “borne along deaf and blind alike, dazed, hordes without judgment by whom it is thought both to be and not to be the same and not the same.” Alternatively translated, mortals have an “aimless eye” and “hearing and tongue full of noise.” In other words, mortals ignorantly bandy about both “what-is” and “what-is-not,” leading their sensory interpretation of the world to be muddled.
The Purpose of Doxa and Its Significance
We have already discussed purposes for which Parmenides may have included the Route of Mortals in his poem. He may have intended to show how the best possible interpretation of the senses is false, thus strengthening the power of his main course of argument. But then why would he continue with a lengthy disquisition into doxa, when he purportedly disproves the cosmology of doxa in the first few lines? There is also the possibility that the doxai are at least in some way compatible with the Route of Truth. For example, a central argument against the doxai is that “what-is” cannot change, and the doxai necessitate change. However, Parmenides never provides an argument for the impossibility of change. McKirahan proposes one: change requires there to be different states within time, but “what-is has no past or future.” I don’t follow his argument, however; just because “what-is” does not come into being or perish does not mean time or different states of “what-is” cannot exist. So if we reform Parmenides’s ideas slightly, preserving only those conclusions which are well-argued, the doxai work—there are no contradictions.

Another possibility is that Parmenides viewed doxa as a sort of necessary evil. Incompatible with Parmenides’s conclusions is the existence of himself as a thinking entity, and of the existence of diverse experiences, whether illusory or not. If he didn’t acknowledge doxai, Parmenides would lose his mind. An image comes to mind of Parmenides being torn between two realms, the divine and the mortal. His visitation with the goddess is representative of his grasping of the divine, and yet, there is another sort of truth, equally impenetrable, that calls out to him. The doxa rejects the divine, and the divine rejects the doxa, each for almost legitimate reasons, yet each failing to dismiss the other completely. What I think Parmenides best conveys through his poem is the reverberation of observation and opinion against his divine conclusion. The Routes are nearly opposite in method and result. The reverberation between them is the only thing shared between them.